.specify/templates/plan-template.md, before:


# Implementation Plan: [FEATURE]

**Branch**: `[###-feature-name]` | **Date**: [DATE] | **Spec**: [link]
**Input**: Feature specification from `/specs/[###-feature-name]/spec.md`

## Execution Flow (/plan command scope)
```
1. Load feature spec from Input path
   → If not found: ERROR "No feature spec at {path}"
2. Fill Technical Context (scan for NEEDS CLARIFICATION)
   → Detect Project Type from context (web=frontend+backend, mobile=app+api)
   → Set Structure Decision based on project type
3. Fill the Constitution Check section based on the content of the constitution document.
4. Evaluate Constitution Check section below
   → If violations exist: Document in Complexity Tracking
   → If no justification possible: ERROR "Simplify approach first"
   → Update Progress Tracking: Initial Constitution Check
5. Execute Phase 0 → research.md
   → If NEEDS CLARIFICATION remain: ERROR "Resolve unknowns"
6. Execute Phase 1 → contracts, data-model.md, quickstart.md, agent-specific template file (e.g., `CLAUDE.md` for Claude Code, `.github/copilot-instructions.md` for GitHub Copilot, `GEMINI.md` for Gemini CLI, `QWEN.md` for Qwen Code or `AGENTS.md` for opencode).
7. Re-evaluate Constitution Check section
   → If new violations: Refactor design, return to Phase 1
   → Update Progress Tracking: Post-Design Constitution Check
8. Plan Phase 2 → Describe task generation approach (DO NOT create tasks.md)
9. STOP - Ready for /tasks command
```

**IMPORTANT**: The /plan command STOPS at step 7. Phases 2-4 are executed by other commands:
- Phase 2: /tasks command creates tasks.md
- Phase 3-4: Implementation execution (manual or via tools)

## Summary
[Extract from feature spec: primary requirement + technical approach from research]

## Technical Context
**Language/Version**: [e.g., Python 3.11, Swift 5.9, Rust 1.75 or NEEDS CLARIFICATION]  
**Primary Dependencies**: [e.g., FastAPI, UIKit, LLVM or NEEDS CLARIFICATION]  
**Storage**: [if applicable, e.g., PostgreSQL, CoreData, files or N/A]  
**Testing**: [e.g., pytest, XCTest, cargo test or NEEDS CLARIFICATION]  
**Target Platform**: [e.g., Linux server, iOS 15+, WASM or NEEDS CLARIFICATION]
**Project Type**: [single/web/mobile - determines source structure]  
**Performance Goals**: [domain-specific, e.g., 1000 req/s, 10k lines/sec, 60 fps or NEEDS CLARIFICATION]  
**Constraints**: [domain-specific, e.g., <200ms p95, <100MB memory, offline-capable or NEEDS CLARIFICATION]  
**Scale/Scope**: [domain-specific, e.g., 10k users, 1M LOC, 50 screens or NEEDS CLARIFICATION]

## Constitution Check
*GATE: Must pass before Phase 0 research. Re-check after Phase 1 design.*

[Gates determined based on constitution file]

## Project Structure

### Documentation (this feature)
```
specs/[###-feature]/
├── plan.md              # This file (/plan command output)
├── research.md          # Phase 0 output (/plan command)
├── data-model.md        # Phase 1 output (/plan command)
├── quickstart.md        # Phase 1 output (/plan command)
├── contracts/           # Phase 1 output (/plan command)
└── tasks.md             # Phase 2 output (/tasks command - NOT created by /plan)
```

### Source Code (repository root)
```
# Option 1: Single project (DEFAULT)
src/
├── models/
├── services/
├── cli/
└── lib/

tests/
├── contract/
├── integration/
└── unit/

# Option 2: Web application (when "frontend" + "backend" detected)
backend/
├── src/
│   ├── models/
│   ├── services/
│   └── api/
└── tests/

frontend/
├── src/
│   ├── components/
│   ├── pages/
│   └── services/
└── tests/

# Option 3: Mobile + API (when "iOS/Android" detected)
api/
└── [same as backend above]

ios/ or android/
└── [platform-specific structure]
```

**Structure Decision**: [DEFAULT to Option 1 unless Technical Context indicates web/mobile app]

## Phase 0: Outline & Research
1. **Extract unknowns from Technical Context** above:
   - For each NEEDS CLARIFICATION → research task
   - For each dependency → best practices task
   - For each integration → patterns task

2. **Generate and dispatch research agents**:
   ```
   For each unknown in Technical Context:
     Task: "Research {unknown} for {feature context}"
   For each technology choice:
     Task: "Find best practices for {tech} in {domain}"
   ```

3. **Consolidate findings** in `research.md` using format:
   - Decision: [what was chosen]
   - Rationale: [why chosen]
   - Alternatives considered: [what else evaluated]

**Output**: research.md with all NEEDS CLARIFICATION resolved

## Phase 1: Design & Contracts
*Prerequisites: research.md complete*

1. **Extract entities from feature spec** → `data-model.md`:
   - Entity name, fields, relationships
   - Validation rules from requirements
   - State transitions if applicable

2. **Generate API contracts** from functional requirements:
   - For each user action → endpoint
   - Use standard REST/GraphQL patterns
   - Output OpenAPI/GraphQL schema to `/contracts/`

3. **Generate contract tests** from contracts:
   - One test file per endpoint
   - Assert request/response schemas
   - Tests must fail (no implementation yet)

4. **Extract test scenarios** from user stories:
   - Each story → integration test scenario
   - Quickstart test = story validation steps

5. **Update agent file incrementally** (O(1) operation):
   - Run `.specify/scripts/bash/update-agent-context.sh copilot`
     **IMPORTANT**: Execute it exactly as specified above. Do not add or remove any arguments.
   - If exists: Add only NEW tech from current plan
   - Preserve manual additions between markers
   - Update recent changes (keep last 3)
   - Keep under 150 lines for token efficiency
   - Output to repository root

**Output**: data-model.md, /contracts/*, failing tests, quickstart.md, agent-specific file

## Phase 2: Task Planning Approach
*This section describes what the /tasks command will do - DO NOT execute during /plan*

**Task Generation Strategy**:
- Load `.specify/templates/tasks-template.md` as base
- Generate tasks from Phase 1 design docs (contracts, data model, quickstart)
- Each contract → contract test task [P]
- Each entity → model creation task [P] 
- Each user story → integration test task
- Implementation tasks to make tests pass

**Ordering Strategy**:
- TDD order: Tests before implementation 
- Dependency order: Models before services before UI
- Mark [P] for parallel execution (independent files)

**Estimated Output**: 25-30 numbered, ordered tasks in tasks.md

**IMPORTANT**: This phase is executed by the /tasks command, NOT by /plan

## Phase 3+: Future Implementation
*These phases are beyond the scope of the /plan command*

**Phase 3**: Task execution (/tasks command creates tasks.md)  
**Phase 4**: Implementation (execute tasks.md following constitutional principles)  
**Phase 5**: Validation (run tests, execute quickstart.md, performance validation)

## Complexity Tracking
*Fill ONLY if Constitution Check has violations that must be justified*

| Violation | Why Needed | Simpler Alternative Rejected Because |
|-----------|------------|-------------------------------------|
| [e.g., 4th project] | [current need] | [why 3 projects insufficient] |
| [e.g., Repository pattern] | [specific problem] | [why direct DB access insufficient] |


## Progress Tracking
*This checklist is updated during execution flow*

**Phase Status**:
- [ ] Phase 0: Research complete (/plan command)
- [ ] Phase 1: Design complete (/plan command)
- [ ] Phase 2: Task planning complete (/plan command - describe approach only)
- [ ] Phase 3: Tasks generated (/tasks command)
- [ ] Phase 4: Implementation complete
- [ ] Phase 5: Validation passed

**Gate Status**:
- [ ] Initial Constitution Check: PASS
- [ ] Post-Design Constitution Check: PASS
- [ ] All NEEDS CLARIFICATION resolved
- [ ] Complexity deviations documented

---
*Based on Constitution v2.1.1 - See `/memory/constitution.md`*

Commit message:

feat: update constitution and templates to align with new principles and performance standards

.specify/templates/plan-template.md, after:


# Implementation Plan: [FEATURE]

**Branch**: `[###-feature-name]` | **Date**: [DATE] | **Spec**: [link]
**Input**: Feature specification from `/specs/[###-feature-name]/spec.md`

## Execution Flow (/plan command scope)
```
1. Load feature spec from Input path
   → If not found: ERROR "No feature spec at {path}"
2. Fill Technical Context (scan for NEEDS CLARIFICATION)
   → Detect Project Type from context (web=frontend+backend, mobile=app+api)
   → Set Structure Decision based on project type
3. Fill the Constitution Check section based on the content of the constitution document.
4. Evaluate Constitution Check section below
   → If violations exist: Document in Complexity Tracking
   → If no justification possible: ERROR "Simplify approach first"
   → Update Progress Tracking: Initial Constitution Check
5. Execute Phase 0 → research.md
   → If NEEDS CLARIFICATION remain: ERROR "Resolve unknowns"
6. Execute Phase 1 → contracts, data-model.md, quickstart.md, agent-specific template file (e.g., `CLAUDE.md` for Claude Code, `.github/copilot-instructions.md` for GitHub Copilot, `GEMINI.md` for Gemini CLI, `QWEN.md` for Qwen Code or `AGENTS.md` for opencode).
7. Re-evaluate Constitution Check section
   → If new violations: Refactor design, return to Phase 1
   → Update Progress Tracking: Post-Design Constitution Check
8. Plan Phase 2 → Describe task generation approach (DO NOT create tasks.md)
9. STOP - Ready for /tasks command
```

**IMPORTANT**: The /plan command STOPS at step 7. Phases 2-4 are executed by other commands:
- Phase 2: /tasks command creates tasks.md
- Phase 3-4: Implementation execution (manual or via tools)

## Summary
[Extract from feature spec: primary requirement + technical approach from research]

## Technical Context
**Language/Version**: [e.g., Python 3.11, Swift 5.9, Rust 1.75 or NEEDS CLARIFICATION]  
**Primary Dependencies**: [e.g., FastAPI, UIKit, LLVM or NEEDS CLARIFICATION]  
**Storage**: [if applicable, e.g., PostgreSQL, CoreData, files or N/A]  
**Testing**: [e.g., pytest, XCTest, cargo test or NEEDS CLARIFICATION]  
**Target Platform**: [e.g., Linux server, iOS 15+, WASM or NEEDS CLARIFICATION]
**Project Type**: [single/web/mobile - determines source structure]  
**Performance Goals**: [domain-specific, e.g., 1000 req/s, 10k lines/sec, 60 fps or NEEDS CLARIFICATION]  
**Constraints**: [domain-specific, e.g., <200ms p95, <100MB memory, offline-capable or NEEDS CLARIFICATION]  
**Scale/Scope**: [domain-specific, e.g., 10k users, 1M LOC, 50 screens or NEEDS CLARIFICATION]

## Constitution Check

*GATE: Must pass before Phase 0 research. Re-check after Phase 1 design.*

This section must validate the feature/spec against the active constitution principles in
`/memory/constitution.md`. At minimum, the following gates MUST be evaluated and recorded
in the plan output:

- Code Quality: Does the plan include linting, static analysis, and explicit code-review requirements?
- Testing Standards: Are contract, integration, and unit test plans included and set to fail before
   implementation where applicable?
- UX Consistency: For user-facing features, does the plan reference the design system, accessibility
   criteria, and UX acceptance tests?
- Performance & Scalability: Are performance targets and test plans specified when applicable?

If any gate is not satisfied, the plan MUST list required remediation items and mark the Constitution
Check as FAIL. Plans with FAIL MUST NOT proceed to Phase 0 until the gate items are addressed.

## Project Structure

### Documentation (this feature)
```
specs/[###-feature]/
├── plan.md              # This file (/plan command output)
├── research.md          # Phase 0 output (/plan command)
├── data-model.md        # Phase 1 output (/plan command)
├── quickstart.md        # Phase 1 output (/plan command)
├── contracts/           # Phase 1 output (/plan command)
└── tasks.md             # Phase 2 output (/tasks command - NOT created by /plan)
```

### Source Code (repository root)
```
# Option 1: Single project (DEFAULT)
src/
├── models/
├── services/
├── cli/
└── lib/

tests/
├── contract/
├── integration/
└── unit/

# Option 2: Web application (when "frontend" + "backend" detected)
backend/
├── src/
│   ├── models/
│   ├── services/
│   └── api/
└── tests/

frontend/
├── src/
│   ├── components/
│   ├── pages/
│   └── services/
└── tests/

# Option 3: Mobile + API (when "iOS/Android" detected)
api/
└── [same as backend above]

ios/ or android/
└── [platform-specific structure]
```

**Structure Decision**: [DEFAULT to Option 1 unless Technical Context indicates web/mobile app]

## Phase 0: Outline & Research
1. **Extract unknowns from Technical Context** above:
   - For each NEEDS CLARIFICATION → research task
   - For each dependency → best practices task
   - For each integration → patterns task

2. **Generate and dispatch research agents**:
   ```
   For each unknown in Technical Context:
     Task: "Research {unknown} for {feature context}"
   For each technology choice:
     Task: "Find best practices for {tech} in {domain}"
   ```

3. **Consolidate findings** in `research.md` using format:
   - Decision: [what was chosen]
   - Rationale: [why chosen]
   - Alternatives considered: [what else evaluated]

**Output**: research.md with all NEEDS CLARIFICATION resolved

## Phase 1: Design & Contracts
*Prerequisites: research.md complete*

1. **Extract entities from feature spec** → `data-model.md`:
   - Entity name, fields, relationships
   - Validation rules from requirements
   - State transitions if applicable

2. **Generate API contracts** from functional requirements:
   - For each user action → endpoint
   - Use standard REST/GraphQL patterns
   - Output OpenAPI/GraphQL schema to `/contracts/`

3. **Generate contract tests** from contracts:
   - One test file per endpoint
   - Assert request/response schemas
   - Tests must fail (no implementation yet)

4. **Extract test scenarios** from user stories:
   - Each story → integration test scenario
   - Quickstart test = story validation steps

5. **Update agent file incrementally** (O(1) operation):
   - Run `.specify/scripts/bash/update-agent-context.sh copilot`
     **IMPORTANT**: Execute it exactly as specified above. Do not add or remove any arguments.
   - If exists: Add only NEW tech from current plan
   - Preserve manual additions between markers
   - Update recent changes (keep last 3)
   - Keep under 150 lines for token efficiency
   - Output to repository root

**Output**: data-model.md, /contracts/*, failing tests, quickstart.md, agent-specific file

## Phase 2: Task Planning Approach
*This section describes what the /tasks command will do - DO NOT execute during /plan*

**Task Generation Strategy**:
- Load `.specify/templates/tasks-template.md` as base
- Generate tasks from Phase 1 design docs (contracts, data model, quickstart)
- Each contract → contract test task [P]
- Each entity → model creation task [P] 
- Each user story → integration test task
- Implementation tasks to make tests pass

**Ordering Strategy**:
- TDD order: Tests before implementation 
- Dependency order: Models before services before UI
- Mark [P] for parallel execution (independent files)

**Estimated Output**: 25-30 numbered, ordered tasks in tasks.md

**IMPORTANT**: This phase is executed by the /tasks command, NOT by /plan

## Phase 3+: Future Implementation
*These phases are beyond the scope of the /plan command*

**Phase 3**: Task execution (/tasks command creates tasks.md)  
**Phase 4**: Implementation (execute tasks.md following constitutional principles)  
**Phase 5**: Validation (run tests, execute quickstart.md, performance validation)

## Complexity Tracking
*Fill ONLY if Constitution Check has violations that must be justified*

| Violation | Why Needed | Simpler Alternative Rejected Because |
|-----------|------------|-------------------------------------|
| [e.g., 4th project] | [current need] | [why 3 projects insufficient] |
| [e.g., Repository pattern] | [specific problem] | [why direct DB access insufficient] |


## Progress Tracking
*This checklist is updated during execution flow*

**Phase Status**:
- [ ] Phase 0: Research complete (/plan command)
- [ ] Phase 1: Design complete (/plan command)
- [ ] Phase 2: Task planning complete (/plan command - describe approach only)
- [ ] Phase 3: Tasks generated (/tasks command)
- [ ] Phase 4: Implementation complete
- [ ] Phase 5: Validation passed

**Gate Status**:
- [ ] Initial Constitution Check: PASS
- [ ] Post-Design Constitution Check: PASS
- [ ] All NEEDS CLARIFICATION resolved
- [ ] Complexity deviations documented

---
*Based on Constitution v1.0.0 - See `/memory/constitution.md`*
